In this paper I study discursive practices of Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi during the COVID-19 pandemic. In response to the pandemic, political leadership across the globe had to take tough decisions such as restrictions on the social and personal lives of individuals. This meant addressing concerns over ensuring compliance with these restrictions. I examine how Modi managed these concerns in his communication with the Indian polity over TV and radio broadcasts. I do so in instances where Modi gave specific instructions about following restrictions or other COVID appropriate behaviours. Using discourse analysis, I analyse data from two prominent ways of communicating in the pandemic, Mann Ki Baat and addresses to the nation. Analyses show that Modi developed two sets of non-electoral relations across his communication, which treated compliance as normatively expected: a) between Modi and Indians and b) among Indians themselves. These relations made way for treating audiences as those who are in specific social roles where duty and service were normative. Instructions and their compliance were embedded in these roles and treated as expected and consequently moral acts. Modi’s discursive practices worked to perform a politics of service and duty, where compliance is ultimately treated as expected service.

Keywords: Compliance, COVID-19, Modi, India, Political discourse, Service, Duty
Go to:
1. Introduction
The first few cases of COVID-19 were reported to the World Health Organization by China on December 31, 2019. Although identified at that time as pneumonia of unknown viral etiology, the virus causing the illness has since been identified as SARS-CoV-2. Soon after the first few cases, countries across the globe reported cases of COVID-19 leading the World Health Organization to declare COVID-19 as a pandemic on March 11, 2020 (WHO, 2020). Similar to initial responses to other pandemics or epidemics, initial responses to COVID-19 were primarily epidemiological, in so far as these addressed concerns over spread. For individuals and communities this implied complying with a range of restrictions on their movements and other tasks. Implementing these restrictions required able leadership. Indeed, the WHO Director-General Dr Ghebreyesus, in the speech where he declared COVID-19 as a pandemic, also nominated political leadership as key to safeguarding public health (WHO, 2020). In this paper, I examine one aspect of political leadership that was at the core of many actions taken in response to the COVID-19 pandemic – addressing compliance. I examine how political leadership engaged with compliance in the case of Union of India.

India reported its first case on January 30, 2020. Increasing numbers of cases were being reported from mid-March. To date in India, the reported deaths due to COVID-19 are 5,12,281 and excess deaths are estimated to be around 1,285,240, with 41,952,712 total cases since the pandemic began. On March 24, 2020, the Union Government of India declared a nation-wide lockdown in response to rising cases of COVID-19. From mid-June 2020, the Government treated this ‘first wave’ as abating, with gradual lifting of restrictions. In response to a ‘second wave’ in 2021 however, the Union Government did not impose a nation-wide lockdown. There were other forms of restrictions on social and personal lives. Alongside lockdowns, the Union and State Governments implemented a range of measures in the dedicated program of ‘#IndiaFightsCorona - COVID-19′.

Political leadership was particularly important in managing the COVID-19 pandemic since social measures, under the rubric of ‘COVID appropriate behaviours’, were the first line of defence until any medical interventions, such as vaccinations were available. In response to a pandemic such as this, political leadership is faced with two challenges: first is to take decisions that imposed restrictions on the polity in ways that could well be detrimental to many individuals and groups. Researchers have identified how trust in the national political leadership can promote compliance (Ezeibe et al., 2020, Faulkner, 2021). However, protests and anti-mask movements in several nations suggest that securing compliance is not an easy task (Faulkner, 2021, Favero and Pedersen, 2020, France 24, 2021). Second, an equally significant task is to communicate these decisions. In particular, decisions that involved compliance with the state-imposed restrictions required careful framing (Hunt, 2021). For instance, Wodak (2021) shows that political leaders in Europe framed the COVID-19 pandemic in ways that resonated with long cherished regional ideals in legitimizing these restrictive measures. In the present paper then, I examine similar discursive practices in the case of Union of India. I examine practices of India’s Prime Minister Narendra Damodardas Modi (Modi from hereon) in speeches that addressed concerns over compliance with COVID-appropriate behaviours1 .

Go to:
2. The pandemic and political discourse
Discursive researchers show that politicians use several linguistic, discursive, and rhetorical practices to legitimize various forms of actions (Chilton et al., 2002, Van Dijk, 1998). Wodak’s (2021) study on European political leaders’ framing of the COVID-19 pandemic, mentioned above, focuses on discursive practices of framing the pandemic and responses to it. Wodak (2021) draws attention to the use of four discursive frames: religious resurrection, dialogue, trust, and war. For Wodak (2021) these frames are ‘typical patterns and characteristics’ (p. 336) of political discourses and significantly, were embedded in ‘nativist and nationalistic rhetoric’. It is noteworthy then that those restrictions were not merely framed in terms of health and illness, but implicated specific relations between individual themselves or individuals and a nation. Wodak argues that frames such as this are ways of dealing with anxieties about death. At the same time, these also develop specific forms of biopolitics.

In other contexts, researchers similarly show that other ways of discursively making sense of the pandemic involve political threads. Rohela et al (2020) show the use of ‘war metaphor’ in political and media discourse in India. Metaphors are powerful linguistic and rhetorical devices that define what is real and at the same time exclude what is not (Charteris-Black, 2014, Lakoff and Johnson, 2002). The use of metaphors can then promote and hide different ideologies (Van Leeuwan, 2018). Rohela et al (2020) do identify several problems with the use of the war metaphor, prominent among which is the short-sightedness of responses to COVID-19. Martinez-Brawley and Gualda (2020) show the pervasive use of war metaphor in Spain and the US. Other researchers identify the use of ‘nation as a family’ metaphor during the COVID-19 pandemic. Hunt (2021) examines the use of the ‘family metaphor’ by South African President Cyril Ramphosa during the COVID-19 pandemic to legitimize the imposition of lockdowns and other measures. Wodak (2021) shows similar uses of the family metaphor in the Austrian context during the COVID-19 pandemic in ways to legitimize the rules and restrictions imposed. Frames and metaphors identified above then are not merely opportune linguistic devices, but carry with them inferences about leadership, coordination, appropriateness of responses, and rejections of alternatives. The political significance of these comes from their use by political spokespersons in political contexts, like addressing the nation, but also through the ideologies effected through these frames and metaphors.

For researchers, who examine discourse of politics, the practices of communicating are central to the ideological effects of the use of metaphors and frames (Cammaerts, 2012). Researchers show that political discourse is mediated in ways that shape and frame the message and the audiences (see research collections in: Ekström and Firmstone, 2017, Partington and Taylor, 2018). A relevant finding from such research studies is that political discourse cannot be studied in isolation to the medium of its communication. The importance of media is primarily for the possibility for the communication to reach large and specific groups of audiences. In addition, different media themselves promote distinct forms of discursive practices (Bennett & Entman, 2001). An outcome then is that political discourse is not merely that which is designed for reception by public, but also shaped by and shapes media (Fetzer, 2013). Features of contemporary media add another layer of complexity, since distinctions between these platforms can become blurred – since content generated in one medium is readily made available and accessed via other media. Indeed Rai (2019) shows that Modi’s speeches are designed to be consumed across different media. For communication that purportedly address a wider polity then, a more relevant concern is around features of those being addressed.

Go to:
3. Political discourse and audiences
It is by no means news that a substantial aspect of mediated political discourse is about the ‘people’, ‘polity’, or ‘citizens’. On the one hand, research shows that references to such vague groups or entities allows for justifying various political actions (Peters & Witschge, 2015; van Dijk, 2007). On the other hand, researchers make the argument that such entities themselves do not pre-exist the very political discourse (Chakravartty and Roy, 2015, Coleman and Ross, 2010). Constructions of these entities are then to be examined for how these are accomplished and their uses in specific occasions.

Examination of constructions of the polity or audience point to an important practice for politics, namely constructions that develop relations between the political leader and the wider polity (Mazzoleni, 2017). Political speakers might construct common group membership with those ostensibly being addressed or construct them as agents of action seeking to mobilize them (Condor, Tileagă & Billig, 2013). A common practice is the use of pronouns that show alignment or distancing of political spokespersons from these groups. De Fina (1995) argues that pronoun usage by political leaders can offer distinct inferences about how inclusive the leader is in relation to those being referred. Deriving from the work of Goffman (1981) on footing and the implications of taking differing stances with respect to what is being said, De Fina (1995) shows that the use of different pronouns works to flexibly align the speaker with the interests of different groups. She notes that the use of self-inclusive pronouns, such as ‘we’ and ‘us’ along with the absence of the singular ‘I’, in speeches of an Indian peasant organization leader in Mexico, work to legitimize the group, instead of the political leader, as political actor(s). In contrast, the use of singular ‘I’ is routinely used to offer evaluations and opinions, rather than to indicate inclusion or solidarity with groups. Wodak and van Dijk (2000) show that pronouns such as ‘we’ and ‘they’ can work to construct a distinct ‘other’ who is unrelated to the speaker.

Another notable practice is the use of membership categories. Sacks (1995) demonstrated that the use of membership categories, like ‘leader’, ‘citizen’, or ‘young’, are means of sense-making of and accomplishing social action. This is because the use of these categories offers inferences about known-in-common features associated with these categories. The features can be about normatively associated activities, rights and entitlements, or relations. A prominent feature of membership categories then is that these derive from membership categorization devices (Housley & Fitzgerald, 2015). Categories such as ‘mother’, ‘brother’, and ‘daughter’, are collected together by the device ‘family’, where mutual expectations of activities and entitlements are informed by culturally salient kinship relations. In political discourse, it is expected that devices of governance and democracy can collect categories of ‘Prime Minister’, ‘elected leader’, and ‘citizen’ in ways so that normative relations of accountability and responsibility can be mobilized (Housley & Fitzgerald, 2009). The normativity also makes way for moral character of the relations and expectations, since a breach of these normative duties is open to complaints (Jayyusi, 1984).

For political spokespersons these categorizations provide unique possibilities for implicating differing relations with social groups in ways that serve their own political projects. Again, pronouns – ‘we’, ‘they’, and ‘our’ – provide useful resources (Housley & Fitzgerald, 2009). LeCouteur et al. (2001) demonstrate that membership categories used by political actors in combination with pronouns enable flexible alignment with different groups to accomplish specific political ends. Their examination showed that Australian parliamentarians developed categorizations of themselves and Aboriginal peoples of Australia in ways to align themselves with the former or the wider national group of Australians in managing their support for controversial land policies. In taking-up these positions vis-à-vis audiences or others, political leaders present themselves as those who are in specific forms of leadership positions.

A similar note is voiced by political scientists. Chakravartty & Roy (2015) make a pertinent observation that the followers or enemies of political leaders or indeed other such groups do not exist a priori (p. 312). Rather these are constructed by political leaders in and through their discursive practices. The role of such sets of individuals either as intended or unintended audiences, or the ultimate targets of leaders’ discourses is of core concern in analyses of populism (Mazzoleni, 2007). In India political leaders have routinely made references to ‘aam admi’ (common man) as facing up to political elite in regional populist politics (Roy, 2014). This allows leaders to position themselves as aligned with the ‘common man’ in their resistance to elite politics, rather than as a politician doing politics. Discursive practices of alignment with ‘the people’ and opposition to ‘others’ were central to Modi’s politics and continued to inform his political discourse in the pandemic. Indeed, major announcements about the lockdown, such as its imposition, extension, and removal were all communicated by public announcements broadcast on TV and radio. These preceded official communications, which outlined specific rules and conditions. Modi’s political communication via media is then central to the management of the COVID-19 pandemic.

Go to:
4. Modi, populism, and the pandemic
Modi was twice elected as India’s Prime Minister and both times with a notable majority. His political party, the Bharatiya Janata Party (Indian People’s Party), have over the last 8 years secured majorities in various states in India. Recent surveys suggest that Modi continues to enjoy strong approval ratings in India (Ghosh, 2021). Alongside explanations based in ethno-religious populism (Sinha, 2021; Vajpeyi, 2020), scholars identify the role of performative mediated populism in the form of Modi’s use of various media platforms in developing and marketing his image (Rai, 2019; Rodriguez & Niemann, 2019; Ward, 2014).

Rai (2019) shows that Modi was the first political leader in India to use media in combination with marketing and branding at a national level. For instance, Modi would use holographic projections of himself during political campaigns. Alongside this, he purportedly used hired ‘trolls’ to manage his brand image on social media (Rai, 2019). Rodriguez and Niemann (2019) show that Modi used social media to bypass broadcast news media, which might involve questions around policy, implementation, and outcomes. The authors argue that this demonstrates Modi’s abilities to prioritize political gains over constraints and affordances of broadcast media.

Simultaneously, broadcast news media have conceded to Modi’s politicking. Ward (2015) shows that Modi received disproportionately more coverage than other political leaders in the 2014 general elections. Chakravartty and Roy (2015) show how media and political institutions in India come together in developing novel networks that Modi has been able to exploit. They argue that the 2014 general elections could well be named ‘mediated elections’ where the political theatre was continuously conveyed to nation-wide audiences via broadcast news media. Bal (2020) makes the provocative argument that increasingly broadcast news media is a loyal echo-chamber for the BJP Government and Modi, with little by way of questions or critical reporting (also see: Rai, 2019).

Notwithstanding the acquiescence of mainstream broadcast news media, a notable element in Modi’s oeuvre is his personal communication via nationwide broadcast programs over the radio or India’s national television network, Doordarshan. Modi started a monthly program, Mann Ki Baat (loosely, ‘Speaking my Heart’) in October 2014 on All India Radio, where he speaks about policies, visions for the country, opposition, and a range of other matters. Further, Modi addresses recipients as ‘Friends’ or ‘countrymen’, a practice among others, which Bhaishya (2015) argues allows Modi to execute soft power (van Dijk, 1993). Bajpai (2021) makes two pertinent observations about Mann Ki Baat: first, she shows that the revival of a radio program in the contemporary times allows for synchronous listening and a distal asynchronous participation through ‘forwarding’ or ‘liking’ on other media platforms. Second, she demonstrates that Modi’s Mann Ki Baat establishes Modi as a sentimental leader who deeply cares about the Indian public. Together, Modi establishes a ‘new public intimacy’ (p.124) in and through a ritualistic performance. Several research papers from within India are exceedingly favourable of Mann Ki Baat (Gandhi and Balamurugan, 2017, Sharma and Dubey, 2021). Kaur and Mishra (2020) in a corpus analyses of Mann Ki Baat programs during the COVID-19 pandemic, offer a highly praiseworthy evaluation of Modi’s communication. This is interesting to note in the face of severe criticisms of how Modi managed the pandemic.

While many of these criticisms have come in the context of the severity of the second wave (March 2021-August 2021), initial criticisms pointed to the delayed response to the pandemic and ignoring scientific input (Ghoshal and Das, 2021). More severe criticisms were about India’s structural preparedness in dealing with a lockdown (Krishnan, 2020). For instance, the first lockdown (25 March 2020) was announced with a few hours warning leaving the public unprepared. India’s internal migrant workers were the worst affected with over 10 million workers having to leave urban places with no public transportation, which resulted in around 200 deaths during their travel (Yadav, 2020). In contrast, Modi was praised for the handling of the first wave, through imposing an early lockdown for example (Sikander, 2021). While it is unclear if this is the reason, but India did report fewer cases and deaths than what was anticipated (Frayer, 2021).

However, extreme death and suffering in the second wave, with an estimated 300,000 deaths between May and September 2021 (Rukmini, 2021), is widely attributed to Modi government’s mismanagement. This has involved references to the lack of preparation after the first wave, which resulted in severe shortage of supply of oxygen and other medical facilities during the second wave (Choudhary, 2021), easing of restrictions, holding outdoor political campaigning and religious festivals, and exporting vaccines to other countries (Ganguly, 2021). The BJP government routinely denied any mismanagement (John, 2021). Government spokespersons dismissed opposition parties’ claims and instead held them responsible for spreading misinformation (Joy, 2021). Critics on social media and elsewhere were targeted legally, through changing internet regulation laws that restricted platforms like Twitter from hosting critical content, or by trolls (Ghaffary, 2021). The Modi government launched a ‘positivity drive’ to address these criticisms and offer a more favourable view of the pandemic situation (John, 2021). It is in this rhetorical space that Modi’s own communication must be studied. For Modi then, the issues are not merely about communicating COVID-19 related instructions, but also managing concerns over his own political leadership and wider politics. Modi’s communication about compliance becomes important in this light, since the discourses that are part of this communication can offer specific roles to Modi himself, the government, wider polity, and how Modi relates to the Indian polity.

Go to:
5. The present study
The present study the examines how compliance with COVID-appropriate behaviours was a concern for Modi in his political discourse. Rather than examine which factors promote or suppress compliance (Ezeibe et al., 2020, Liekefett and Becker, 2021), the present analysis focuses on how Modi oriented to and dealt with compliance as a concern in managing the COVID-19 pandemic, in his communication with the Indian audiences. To do so, it focuses on Modi’s communication about instructions around the COVID appropriate behaviours, vaccination, and other forms of activities proposed to manage the pandemic. Constructions of Modi and the audiences in terms of electoral relations will bring up expectations of activities and entitlements normatively associated with a government and its citizens/residents. These assumptions can be about the role of the government, such as to provide for the public, and the rights and entitlements of citizens/constituents, such as those of freedom and recourse to due processes of law. Similarly, giving and following instructions are expected aspects of relations between a government and its citizens.

Alternative constructions of political leaders and other groups can develop forms of relations that are not based on social arrangements other than electoral relations. Hunt (2021), in this special issue, shows that the President of South Africa Cyril Ramaphosa uses metaphors of family in treating the relations between himself and the public as one that is based on a kinship than a political relation. Hunt (2021) argues that this allows him to maintain legitimacy and credibility in dealing with COVID-19 pandemic. In the present paper, I extend current research knowledge on discursive practices of political leaders through a dedicated focus on how relations between the political leader and the audience are constructed to effect specific outcomes in the COVID-19 pandemic. As researchers discussed above note, Modi is known to develop alternative forms of communication with the audiences, which embed various forms of relations between himself and his audiences. I then specifically ask what forms of relations were developed and used by Modi in managing concerns over compliance with COVID-19 appropriate behaviours.